jordan (o.s.)i don't know. she wouldn't tell me. but before the letter disappears completely we read one moreline: "the truth is..."  dissolve to:  ext. louisville church - front steps - late afternoon daisy and tom, newly married, pose for photos. jordan (o.s.)anyways, that day, at five o'clock,daisy faye married tom buchananwith more pomp and circumstancethan louisville had ever seen...  dissolve to:  ext. times square - night jordan and nick stroll beneath the soaring electric signs.  jordanafter the honeymoon, i saw them insanta barbara. it was touching,actually... (more)
54.  jordan (cont'd)i'd never seen a girl so in lovewith her husband. (muses cynically)a week later, tom crashed his car.the girl with him was a chambermaidat the santa barbara hotel. it gotinto all the papers... as jordan and nick approach the curb, waiting for a cab, nickturns to jordan; he's struck by a... sudden, puzzled thought.  nickit's a strange coincidence, isn'tit? gatsby's house being justacross the bay... jordan whirls round--  jordanit's no coincidence. he bought thathouse to be near her, he threw allthose parties hoping she'd wanderin one night. he constantly askedabout daisy... i was the first onewho knew her. nick takes this in; as if seeing gatsby for the first time. 
 nickall that for a girl he hasn't seenin five years...? and now he justwants me to have her for tea...? (to himself)the modesty of it.  jordankind of takes your breath away,doesn't it? a cab pulls up, and nick opens the door...  int. taxi - continuous jordan slides in...  taxi driverevening sweethearts! where to?  jordanlong island, please.55.   nickand you think i should? i mean,does daisy want to see gatsby?  jordan(a stern whisper)she's absolutely not to know. youare just supposed to invite her
over so he can "happen to drop by." close on: nick, unsure... nick (v.o.)i remember feeling torn. was itright to bring my cousin daisy, amarried woman, together with a mani hardly knew? as nick wonders, the taxi floats across times square, underthe cool eyes of the man in the arrow shirt...  dissolve to:  ext. dirt track to nick's bungalow - night nick's taxi pulls past gatsby's mansion, ablaze with light. nick (v.o.)when i returned home, gatsby's waslit, from tower to cellar, as iffor another wild party. but...there wasn't a sound.  ext. nick's bungalow - night as nick's taxi groans away, gatsby appears striding throughthe illuminated trees toward nick.  nick
your place looks like the world'sfair... or coney island!  gatsby (terribly anxious)ah, does it? i've... i've just beenglancing into some rooms... let'sgo to coney island, old sport, wecan take my car--  nickit's too late tonight.56.   gatsbyor we can take a plunge in theswimming pool? i haven't made useof it all summer...  nick
i must go to bed... gatsby looks crestfallen. nick puts him out of his misery.  nick (cont'd)happy to do it. jay-- i'm going tocall daisy and invite her to tea.  gatsbyoh, that's alright. i don't want toput you to any trouble...  nickwhat day would suit you?  gatsbywhat day would suit you...? i don'twant to put you to any trouble...  nickday after tomorrow alright?  gatsbyday after tomorrow? well, i'd...i'd want to get the grass cut. they both look at the grass - there is a sharp line wherenick's ragged lawn ends and gatsby's manicured one begins.  gatsby (cont'd)there's another little thing... ithought-- look here, old sport--you don't make much money, do you?  nicknot really. gatsbyif you'll pardon my... you see, icarry on a little business on theside - a sort of sideline - youunderstand what i'm saying right?you're selling bonds, aren't you,old sport? nick
trying to.57.   gatsbywell, this might interest you... ithappens to be a rather confidentialsort of thing... but you might pickup a nice bit of money.  nicki've got my hands full. gatsby's face falls.  gatsbyyou wouldn't have to do anybusiness with wolfsheim. i assureyou.  nickno, no, no... its a favor jay. justa favor. nick's sincerity disarms gatsby; a tiny, embarrassed nod.  nick (cont'd)happy to do it. gatsbya favor? nickyes. as if no one has ever done him a favor before in his life...  gatsbyah, right, right... goodnight. nickgoodnight. with this, gatsby turns and strolls back toward his blazingcastle. nick's gaze falls upon the unkempt lawn. he smiles.  dissolve to:  ext. nick's bungalow - front lawn - day top shot: an enormous mower clatters through frame, carvingnick's unkempt lawn into a fresh, broad, band of green. reveal: an army of gardnders giving nick's lawn and garden amake-over, fresh paint, new flowers, trimmed hedges...  dissolve to:58.  ext. nick's bungalow - front lawn - the following day heavy rain now falls. gatsby, dressed in white flannel suit, silver shirt, and goldtie, leads a dozen umbrella-holding servants across the lawn.herzog holds an umbrella over gatsby; the other servantsshelter extravagant floral arrangements in crystal vases... nick watches the parade through his window, opening his doorjust as gatsby arrives; the servants continue inside. on the porch, gatsby looks around distractedly.  gatsbyone of the papers said they thoughtthe rain would stop about four. ithink it was the journal... an awkward beat.  nickthe grass looks fine.  gatsbygrass? gatsby looks at nick without really comprehending, or seeing.  gatsby (cont'd)what grass? sudden cut to:  int. nick's bungalow - living room - day tight on: a mantelpiece clock, ticking in the tense silence. wider: the room is crowded with absurdly extravagant floralarrangements. nick sits watching as gatsby intensely paces.the silence stretches, and stretches... finally...  gatsbyhave you got everything you need?  nickperhaps more flowers?  gatsbyi think they did a fine job, don'tyou?59.  
nickbeautiful.  gatsbyyou think it's too much?  nicki think it's what you want.  gatsbyi think so too... she'll beimpressed, won't she old sport? nicki am. with this, gatsby straightens his suit, sits, and hurriedlychecks his watch. another long silence... push in on: gatsby... suddenly! he leaps to his feet!  gatsbyi can't wait all day. i'm leaving!  nickdon't be silly. it's just twominutes to four... but gatsby heads for the door...  gatsbynobody's coming to tea. it's toolate! beeeeep! gatsby glimpses daisy's rolls royce arriving outfront, and turns to nick, flushed with fresh panic. nickit's her. push in on gatsby: mind racing...  ext. nick's bungalow - day daisy's chauffeur-driven rolls pulls up in the muddy drive. as nick assists daisy from the car...  daisyis this absolutely where you live,my dearest one? she looks at him with a mysterious smile.60.   daisy (cont'd)why did i have to come alone? areyou in love with me?  nickthat's the secret of carrawaycastle. (playing along)tell your chauffeur to go far away.  daisycome back in an hour, ferdie! (grave murmur)his name is ferdie.  int. nick's bungalow - hall - day daisy continues ahead into the living room. nick hangs back and listens hopefully to daisy's reaction atdiscovering gatsby. he smiles as he hears a delighted... daisy (o.s.)oh--! oh, my goodness. i... i can'tbelieve it. you-- did you ransack agreenhouse?  int. nick's bungalow - living room - continuous  daisy (to herself)he is in love with me... nick enters, but is shocked to discover that gatsby is notthere. daisy's merely been admiring the flower display...  nickthat's funny.  daisywhat's funny? knock. knock. someone is at the door.  nickone moment...  int. nick's bungalow - hall - continuous nick opens the door.61.  gatsby, pale as death and soaked, glares miserably at nick.  nickwhat are you doing? without a word, gatsby stalks past him, into...  int. nick's bungalow - living room - continuous daisy, her back to the door, is still marvelling at theflowers. then she turns. sees gatsby. a sharp intake ofbreath... the reunited lovers stand, staring at each other for a long,surreal, moment of disbelief. gatsby, eyes locked to daisy's,is drowning in emotion. daisy finally manages an artificial,choking murmur.  daisyi'm certainly glad to see youagain. gatsby's face is flushed; the veins stand out on his neck ashis lips spasm in a hopeless attempt to speak. finally, he finds words...
  gatsbyi'm... certainly glad to see you aswell. their hearts pound - the tension excruciating. eeeekkk! the scream of a boiling kettle off screen breaks the tension--  cut to:  int. nick's bungalow - living room - day gatsby reclines uncomfortably against the mantelpiece. hiselbow rests near the mantelpiece clock. daisy sits opposite;frozen on the edge of a chair. the rattle of the tea tray as nick enters only contributes tothe already unbearable tension. gatsby manages to murmur.  gatsbywe've met before... suddenly the clock tilts at the pressure of gatsby's elbow... 62.  and falls! and breaks!  gatsby (cont'd)ah... sorry... he clumsily tries to repair the clock; but drops it again!  nick (idiotically)it's an old... clock.  daisy(desperate for small talk)lovely though. a lovely... clock. gatsby finally manages to set the clock back on the mantle. gatsby takes a seat. a long silent beat.  daisy (cont'd)we haven't met for many years.  gatsby(an automatic reflex)five years next november. the precision of gatsby's answer is acutely embarrassing. nick(abruptly)tea?  gatsby (dying)thank you old sport.  daisy (also mortified)darling thank you. nick pours; and they all sit stiffly, sipping their tea. a long, terrible silence... suddenly nick stands.  nicki just need to... pop into town.  gatsby (horrified)town...? 63.   nickthe village; i'll be right back. as nick leaves, gatsby follows.  gatsbyi've got to speak to you...!  int. nick's bungalow - kitchen - continuous wildly following nick, gatsby whispers miserably:  gatsbyoh, god! this is a mistake, aterrible, terrible mistake...  nickyou're just embarrassed, that'sall... daisy's embarrassed too.  gatsbyshe's embarrassed?  nickjust as much as you are.  gatsbydon't talk so loud!  nickyou're acting like a little boy!you're rude. daisy's in there allalone and... gatsby raises his hand, looks at nick reproachfully, andheads back into the living room.  ext. nick's bungalow - continuous nick runs for a tree whose leaves shield against the rain. nick (v.o.)looking over my story so far, i'mreminded that for the second timethat summer... wide: nick beneath the tree looks tiny, and very alone. nick (v.o.)i was guarding other people'ssecrets.64.  int. nick's bungalow - living room - day later. nick re-enters, bedraggled, rain-soaked. nick (v.o.)once again i was within... he tries to get gatsby and daisy's attention, to no avail...the lovers are completely and totally absorbed in each other. nick (v.o.)and without... nick bangs pots in the sink - still nothing. he clears his throat:  nickits... stopped raining. daisy turns; a radiant smile. every vestige of embarrassmentbetween daisy and gatsby is gone. gatsby literally glows. gatsbyyes, it has... (to daisy)hasn't it? he stands, walks to the window and looks out across the bay. gatsby (cont'd)what do you think of that, daisy?come look. daisy joins gatsby and they step out onto the porch together.  ext. nick's bungalow - porch - continuous  daisylook. its my house. just thereacross the bay... gatsby and daisy's eyes meet.  gatsbyi know. i have the same view frommy place.  daisywhere's your place? gatsby turns back to nick.65.
   gatsbynick, i want you and daisy both tosee my house. i'd like to show heraround.  nickare you sure you want me to come?  gatsbyabsolutely, old sport. absolutely.  ext. gatsby's castle - front gates - day servants swing open ivy-covered gates...  gatsby (proudly)i had the gates brought in from acastle in normandy. reveal: gatsby's castle glistening in the sunlight. close on: daisy. a delighted cry.  daisyoh, jay...!? its so grand!  gatsbydo you like it?  daisyi love it...! but how do you livehere all alone?  gatsbyi don't. i keep it always full ofinteresting, celebrated people... as daisy runs ahead, gatsby murmurs to nick.  gatsby (cont'd)my house looks well doesn't it? seehow the whole front catches thelight like that? daisy yells back...  dausycome on you two! i want the royaltour!  dissolve to: 66.  ext. gatsby's castle - gardens - day gatsby has transformed into a good-natured show-off, hurryingnick and daisy through a maze of fantastical gardens, pastmagnificent fountains and into his castle...  int. gatsby's castle - kitchen - day gatbsy shows off his brand new orange-juicer.  gatbsyyou must understand, i like allthings that are modern. daisy readies a cocktail shaker beneath the spout of thegiant silver orange juice machine.  gatsbyif you press this button here, theoranges shoot through here, arecrushed there... the juice of 200oranges extracted in one hour...! gatsby presses, the machine groans and juice splashes out!  dissolve to:  ext. gatsby's beach - diving pontoon - late afternoon daisy, nick and gatsby drunkenly drive golf balls out towardthe bay. nick films on the world's first home-camcorder...  gatsbyits a remarkable little camera--latest design. while, nearby, a butler in a boat stands watch over aspinning gramophone and bottles of champagne...  daisyyou do know, i'm a champion golfer,don't you? here, i'll show you howits done. crack! daisy cuts a marvelous swing, snapping a club in two! she falls into gatsby arms... nick films...67.   gatsbyshe looks like she could be on thecover of vogue, don't you think...?  dissolve to:  int. gatsby's castle - grand ballroom - early evening gatsby and nick trail behind daisy, crossing the ballroom. daisy, champagne in hand, spots the soaring ballroom organ.  daisyoh...! its beautiful.  gatsbyits a custom wurlitzer.  daisycan anyone play it?  gatsbyklipspringer can.(to his footmen)someone wake ewing! daisy twirls round, overjoyed...  daisymusic! and we can dance all night!  gatsbyewing's a symphonic genius, he canplay anything...! daisy runs up the stairs and calls down...  daisythen i demand a charleston! gatsby gazes up after daisy, and confides in nick...  gatsby(as if in a dream)she makes it look so splendid,don't you think old sport?  dissolve to:  int. gatsby's castle. gatsby's bedroom - evening nick and daisy follow gatsby into the bedroom...68. 
 gatsby bounds ahead, starting up a spiral stair... he throwsopen a massive cabinet, revealing a prism of suits, dressing-gowns, watches and ties.  gatsbyi've got a man in england who buysme clothes...! he playfully tosses daisy a boater-hat...  gatsby (cont'd)something for the lady... then he begins yanking down shirts and tossing them over therail to daisy...  daisyi've never seen anything like it!  gatsbyhe sends over a selection at thebeginning of each season...  daisyjay! with ever-increasing enthusiasm!  gatsbythese are silk! linen! indianflannel! egyptian cotton! daisy, intoxicated, leaps on the bed, arms outstretched...  daisyno, jay... you'll ruin them! (to nick)nicky! he's a madman! more and more and more shirts float down... the rumble of distant thunder. close on: daisy. time slows as shirts flutter, like giantsnowflakes, down toward her. slowly, quietly, her mirthtransforms to sobs... she hides her face in shirts... gatsby eases down the stairs and nestles beside daisy, takingher tear-streaked face in his hands...  gatsbywhat is it?69.  daisyit's just... it makes me sad,because... daisy glances in nick's direction...  gatsbywhy?  daisy...because... a suspended moment; daisy is incapable of speaking her heart. nick (v.o.)five lost years struggled ondaisy's lips. but all she couldmanage was...  daisyit's just... because i've neverseen such beautiful shirts before.  gatsbyif it wasn't for the mist we couldsee the green light...  daisywhat green light?  gatsbythe one that burns all night at theend of your dock. as gatsby and daisy stare out across the bay... nick (v.o.)possibly, it had occurred to gatsbythat the colossal significance ofthat light had vanished forever.now, it was once again just a greenlight on a dock. his count ofenchanted objects had diminished byone. nick, impelled to remind daisy and gatsby of his presence,emerges from the shadows and descends the spiral staircase. he holds a photo of an elderly man in yachting costume...  nickwho's this? your father?70.   gatsbyno, no.. that's mr. dan cody, oldsport... he's dead now. he used tobe my best friend years ago. daisy joins nick at the bottom of the steps. in the photowith cody, also in yachting costume, is a young gatsby...  daisy (teases)you never told me you had apompadour... or a yacht. gatsby hastily plucks a scrapbook from a row on his desk... gatsbyi want to show you something...look, here's a lot of clippings,about you. they admire a scrapbook together.  daisy (touched)you saved my letters...  gatsbythis was my first photo of you. as daisy flips through and pulls out an old letter of hers,we hear her reading the letter in abstract voiceover: daisy (v.o.)we cant lose each other and let allthis glorious love end in nothing.come home, i'll be here waiting andhoping, for every long dream of youto come true... come home jay... bbbrrrnnnggg! the phone shrills. gatsbyexcuse me. gatsby crosses the room, snatches up the receiver, and turnsaway... he lowers his voice. gatsby (into phone) (cont'd)well i can't talk now old sport... as the timbre of gatsby's voice darkens we push closer. gatsby (into phone) (cont'd) i said a small town. 71.  ecu: gatsby's eyes narrow.  gatsby (into phone) (cont'd) he must know what a small town is. boooommm! a storming wind bangs open the french windows! as nick moves to shut them, he glimpses gatsby...  gatsby (into phone) (cont'd)(frightening) well, he's no use to us if detroit is his idea of a small town... gatsby rings off abruptly, and catches nick's eye - a tensemoment - which gatsby banishes with that electrifying smile. we hear the distant, jaunty sounds of a pipe organ... gatsby (cont'd) ah, klipspringer! he must be awake! shall we?  int. gatsby's castle - grand ballroom - dusk becoming night daisy, wearing a flowing robe and heels, dances a charlestonwith nick. an elaborate picnic, complete with candelabras and a mountainof cushions, is laid out on the floor. there, gatsby sits,looking on, flush with joy. slowly though, gatsby's expression turns introspective. as hewatches daisy dance, memories flood back to him... dissolve to:  flashback. an array of memories and images dissolve one into the other:gatsby and daisy, five years ago, about to kiss; a hand-written letter; a gathering storm; the green light... dissolve to:  int. gatsby's castle - grand ballroom - night hundreds of candles flicker in patterns. as a slow,melancholic waltz plays, gatsby and daisy dance,enraptured... 72.
   daisy (whispers)i wish i had done everything onearth with you. all my life. gatsby holds her closer.  daisy (cont'd)i wish that it could always be likethis...  gatsbyit will be... across the room, nick, exhausted and drunk and unnoticed,stands to leave. at the ballroom doors he turns back andglimpses gatsby and daisy, in a universe all their own... nick (v.o.)if only it had been enough forgatbsy, just to hold daisy... the towering doors close.  dissolve to:  int. gatsby's castle - bedroom - night gatsby stands at his window, staring into the night. nick (v.o.)but he had a grand vision for hislife, and daisy's part in it.  dissolve to:  int. sanitarium - nick's room - end of winter - dusk nick is writing at his desk... nick (v.o.)it wasn't until the end of thatsummer, on the last night i sawgatsby, that he told me of the lifehe had dreamt for himself since hewas a boy...  int. sanitarium - doctor's office - end of winter - dusk nick stops his reading, and, very slowly, admits...73.   nickyou see doctor... gatsby's realname was... james gatz.  dissolve to:  i/e. north dakota farm hut - day push toward: a dilapidated hut, shrouded in a storm of dust. nick (v.o.)his parents were dirt-poor farmersfrom north dakota... discover: young gatz, barefoot, at a dusty desk, surroundedby tattered books, strange charts, and lists. he ispracticing his signature... nick (v.o.)but he never accepted them as hisparents at all. young gatz turns from his writing, and looks through a holein the roof towards the infinite heavens... nick (v.o.)in his own imagination, he was... ason of god... close on: the little boy looks up at camera. nick (v.o.)destined for future glory...   dissolve to:  ext. north dakota - prairie - night the silhouette of teenage gatz, now 16 years old, disappearsinto the hills... nick (v.o.)chasing this destiny, a sixteenyear old gatz ran far, far away.  dissolve to:74.  ext. lake superior - late afternoon close on: a handsome 17 year old young gatsby, in a tornjersey and dirty canvas pants, rowing with all his might. nick (v.o.)one afternoon, off the coast oflake superior, he spotted a yachtin peril... young gatsby lets the row boat drift close to a magnificentyacht. wind is whipping whitecaps on the bay.  nickhe rowed out and rescued thevessel, and its captain, alcoholicmillionaire dan cody... the bleary face of dan cody appears at the yacht's railing.  codywhadzamatta...? cody is very drunk. young gatsby calls urgently.  young gatsbysir! the shoal here's real bad,this wind could drag you onto it... cody waves a dismissive arm...  codywhaderathinkyerdoin..., old sport? he collapses, dead drunk. push in: on young gatsby; a plan forming...  nick (v.o.)this was his opportunity, and heseized it. springing into action, he clambers onto the yacht.  gatsby (voice)i decided right then and there tocall myself: jay gatsby. dissolve to:  ext. cody's yacht - late afternoon young gatsby hoists the sail as the storm rages around him.75.  nick (v.o.)he sailed the yacht out of danger -and into his future...  dissolve to:  ext. cody's yacht - day a perfect sunny day. young gatsby and cody are sailing. nick (v.o.)gatsby showed skill and ambition,and for five years they sailed theworld...  gatsby (voice)
he was alright, old dan, he taughtme everything...  dissolve to:  int. clothing store - day young gatsby, now transformed, models a suit in the mirror. nick (v.o.)how to dress, act, and speak like agentleman... he looks squarely at himself, and repeats a mantra.  young gatsbygatsby. jay gatsby. a pleasure tomeet you, sir. gatsby. jay gatsby.gatsby. jay gatsby.  dissolve to:  ext. cody's yacht - day young gatsby stands at the bow, as the yacht cut across theclear blue ocean... he turns to cody and calls... young gatsbyshe looks well, doesn't she...!?old sport. high and wide: the yacht sails toward the golden sun...76.  nick (v.o.)gatsby hoped to inherit cody'sfortune... but when cody died,gatsby was cheated out of hisinheritance by cody's family...he'd been left with an ability toplay the gentleman, but he was onceagain dirt poor. slam cut to: newspaper montage. piles and piles of new york city newspapers swirl rapidlytoward camera, and we read their headlines: "gatbsy's staggering wealth - money! money! money!" nick (v.o.)by midsummer gatsby was front pagenews... "gatsby buying our city? investment monopoly fuels concerns" "jay cashes in! gatsby strikes wall street gold!" "gatsby invests in skyscrapers!" "jay pays for everything: parties, galas, parks, schools!" "wall streets king? meet jay gatsby!" a final newspaper covers frame: "where's the money from!? mystery millions spark wild rumors" we push toward the paper and dissolve toward:  ext. gatsby's castle - night another glittering party. nick (v.o.)where did the money comes from? fade in: decadent, grotesque images of drunken revellers... nick (v.o.)that's what all of new york wantedto know. and it was the samequestion on tom's mind when heaccompanied daisy to one ofgatsby's glittering parties...77.  discover: gatsby leading tom, daisy and nick to the top ofthe terrace stairs.  ext. gatsby's castle - terrace/dance floor - night  gatsbywe've got a great band here. have alook around... excuse me... he turns briefly to talk to senator gulick...  tom(mutters to daisy)a lot of these newly rich peopleare just filthy bootleggers. 
 daisynot gatsby. he's a businessman.  tom (snorts)hah! a businessman...  daisyhe owned a lot of drug stores. gatsby gracefully introduces senator gulick to the group...  gatsbymay i introduce senator gulick?this is mr. carraway and mrs.buchanan...  daisydelighted...  gatsbyand mr. buchanan...(a moment's hesitation)the polo player.  tom (objecting quickly)oh no. not me.  senator gulick(shaking hands, nods)always a pleasure to meet abuchanan. gatsby bids the senator farewell, while tom glowers to daisy: 78.   tomi'd rather not be the polo player.  daisyoh tom... you should be proud ofyour achievements.  gatsby interjects--  gatsby(to the group)may i show you around? he guides them down the stairs...  gatsby (cont'd)you must see the faces of a lot ofpeople you've heard of.  daisyabsolutely!  tom (scoffs)we don't go around very much. idon't think i recognize a singleperson...  gatsbyperhaps you know that lady there? gatsby indicates a lovely, orchid of a woman: marlene moon,the silent film star.  daisy(taking gatsby's arm)its marlene moon... i adore herpictures... as gatsby leads daisy, we catch tom repeating to nick...  tomi'd really rather not be the poloplayer... dissolve to:  ext. gatsby's castle - garden table - night tom, daisy, nick and gatsby sit an elaborately conceiveddinner table, watching the band... 79.   daisy (to nick)these things excite me so... gatsby turns to tom...  gatsbyi believe we've met somewherebefore, mr. buchanan. about a monthago.